*********************************
Acknowledgements and Contributors
*********************************

============
Contributors
============

-----------------
Roman S. Borschel
-----------------

Roman is a software developer from Berlin, Germany who joined the
project as a user in its early stages in 2006. Though being mainly a
Java and .NET developer who currently works in the field of medical
information systems, Roman is also a long-time PHP user and likes to
push PHP to its limits and beyond.

Having a special interest in Object-Relational Mapping, he finds it
challenging to try to apply ideas and concepts of object persistence
solutions of other languages and tools in the PHP world where this
territory is still in its infancy.

----------------
Guilherme Blanco
----------------

Guilherme Blanco was born in 09/19/1983 and lives in Brazil. He has a
bachelors degree in Computer Science from the Federal University of SÃ£o
Carlos and works in the web development industry. He is currently
employed by his company named Bisna and holds a blog at
http://blog.bisna.com.

He has worked with Java, .NET and the majority of server/client side
languages and decided to pick PHP as his default development language.
Instead of reinventing the wheel after he planned an entire ORM tool, he
decided to jump on board the Doctrine project in November of 2007 and
put his efforts in to help it move forward.

-----------------
Konsta Vesterinen
-----------------

Konsta Vesterinen is the founder of the Doctrine project and is
responsible for getting things started for this great project. He is the
creator of the first versions of all code and documentation for
Doctrine. A majority of the content in this book has been evolved and
transformed from his original version that was created years ago.

=========
Companies
=========

As Doctrine is an open source project, the names mentioned above are
only the people who organize and manage the contributions of the
community behind the project. Though the people above get most of the
credit for the work, none of this would be possible without the
companies that have gotten behind Doctrine and supported it in any way
they can. Below are some acknowledgements to the companies that have
helped get the project to where it is today.

--------------
centre{source}
--------------

Before working for `Sensio Labs <http://www.sensiolabs.com>`_, Jonathan
Wage was one of the original employees at
`centre{source} <http://www.centresource.com>`_. The great people at
this company saw the need for a powerful ORM in the PHP world and got
behind the project right away. Jonathan was permitted to spend countless
hours of company time on the project to help move things forward.

Without these contributions, the project would not have been able to
make the jump from a small starting open source project to a large and
trusted project. Now Doctrine is known across the globe and companies
rely on the project to assist with the building of their high end web
applications.

.. note::

    `centre{source} <http://www.centresource.com>`_ is a
    full-service interactive firm assisting organizations that view the
    web as a strategic asset. They provide their clients four essential
    services: strategy, planning, execution, and on-going management.

-----------
Sensio Labs
-----------

.. figure:: http://www.sensiolabs.com/images/sensio-labs.gif
   :align: center
   :alt: Sensio Labs

   Sensio Labs
In September of 2008, Sensio Labs officially got behind the Doctrine
project and hired Jonathan to work on the project full-time. This was a
major turning point for the project as it showed that corporate
companies were willing to sponsor not just existing resources, but real
funds.

With this change, lots of new things became possible such as Doctrine
trainings, certifications, this book and much more.

.. note::

    `Sensio <http://www.sensio.com>`_ created
    `symfony <http://www.symfony-project.com>`_, a PHP Web application
    framework. Sensio has over 10 years of experience developing high
    value web applications and is a major player in the open source
    world.

==================
Other Contributors
==================

Below are some other contributors that have played a role in the success
of the project that deserve a mention here.

-  **`Ian P. Christian <http://pookey.co.uk/blog/>`_** - For hosting the
   Doctrine infrastructure on his own dime.
-  **Werner Mollentze** - For providing the original concepts of the
   Doctrine logo.
-  **`Phu Son Nguyen <http://www.phuson.com/>`_** - For providing a
   final copy of the Doctrine logo and the web design.
-  **`Fabien Potencier <http://www.aide-de-camp.org/>`_** - For lending
   us code from the symfony project to help with building the Doctrine
   website.

Lots of other people have contributed a long the way, as I cannot
mention everyone here, you can always read more about the contributors
on the Doctrine `about <http://www.doctrine-project.org/about>`_ page.
